16 Addiction policy

Intoxication and addiction have been part of all cultures for ages. This fact requires that we deal with consumption of stimulants and their results free of prejudice and rely on a pragmatic addiction policy to prevent damage to society. The current, repressive drug policy, whose aim is abstinence, has obviously failed: It has created a black market, where neither minors nor consumers are protected and the rights of non-consumers are ignored. The Pirate Party supports an addiction policy based on scientific facts. This addiction policy is based on the following:

16.0.1 Comprehensive, ideology-free education

Each desire, each craving can lead to addiction. Early prevention is necessary to prevent people from losing control over their own needs. Risk-conscious, hedonistic behavior must be based on the knowledge of effects, side-effects and possible health hazards, not just of illegal stimulants, but of all potentially addictive substances and behaviors. This knowledge must be taught to children from an early age.

16.0.2 Responsibility and a culture of consumption

Only those who know how to reflect on their own needs and resist peer pressure know how to enjoy consumption in a self-conscious, self-determined manner. Consumption and intoxication belong to our society and fulfill fundamental social functions. Respect for individuals’ free decisions and trust in their common sense and ability to enjoy life are the basis for establishing a culture of consumption which knows how to make use of intoxication as a creative opportunity.

16.0.3 Protection of minors and consumers

The consumption and purchase of stimulants must be legalized. Otherwise, the state will not be able to regulate and intervene. By relying on prohibition, the state evades its responsibility and leaves its citizens vulnerable to an uncontrolled black market without protection of youth or minors. If stimulants were legalized, they could be subjected to quality checks by the state. Stimulants must be sold with package inserts in the future, which will include information about the type and dosage and about public aid for users.

16.0.4 Help for high-risk consumers

Not everyone can use stimulants responsibly. Addicts and people threatened by addiction need our understanding and easy access to all levels of support. The Pirates will provide damage-minimizing measures, such as free syringes and drug checking. A wide network of help and treatment centers will not just mitigate the worst circumstances, but also get relatives and co-addicts involved. This relieves the burden on the public healthcare system.

16.0.5 Protection of non-consumers

Government regulation should be limited to the prohibition of behavior which damages third parties. The state must respect the personal freedom of all citizens. The Pirates are against general drug tests for employees. These tests must be limited to dangerous jobs and occupations. Furthermore, stubborn drug policies must not obstruct medical assistance to patients suffering from pain. These five points are the basis for a drug policy tailored for responsible individuals, not the illusory goal of abstinence. Considering the billions which can be saved by stopping criminal prosecution and the billions which can be earned by introducing appropriate taxation of stimulants, we are confident that this pragmatic drug policy can be implemented.
