15 Drug policy

German drug policy has been relying on prohibition for almost 40 years, aiming for the unrealistic goal of a drug-free society. Substances found to have a low risk of addiction in relevant studies remain prohibited while more dangerous substances, such as alcohol and tobacco are socially accepted, just like pharmaceutical products with a comparably high risk of addiction. The state adheres to ineffective laws for the protection of minors, which ignore the real risk of substances, overburden police forces and courts and cost citizens billions of inefficiently allocated tax euros every year.

15.1 New drug policy

The Massachusetts Pirate Party supports a repression-free drug policy and demands an end to the failed prohibition. We reject the current, scientifically unsustainable classification into legal and illegal substances and demand an objective evaluation and handling of all psychoactive substances based solely on their risk potential. The current, groundless paternalization of adults in their responsible use of narcotics and stimulants runs counter to the basic principles of the Pirate Party and our concept of a responsible society. Consumers are still being criminalized, which has led to black-market trading. This must be replaced with controlled distribution and retail structures. This would create a framework which would remove many problems we face today, which occur solely due to dangerous additives and lack of hygiene.

15.2 Regulation, help and guidance instead of punishment

Prevention must be honest and objective to deliver sustainable and convincing results. Necessary regulations under a new drug policy must involve all stakeholders and users to develop ideology-free, realistically feasible concepts. Laws, regulation and controlled supply rules must only be enacted in case of real dangers, not based on ideological or economic arguments. Unimpeded and uncensored access to all information on all drugs must be provided to each citizen.

15.3 Protection of minors

The Pirate Party explicitly supports only sensible and necessary laws or regulations for the protection of minors. All adults must be aware of their responsibility to provide comprehensive and objective information to children and adolescents on the dangers of drug use. Effective protection of children and adolescents cannot be achieved by regula- tions and prohibitions; this has been proven. An open, objective treatment of the topic in the form of comprehensive public education in schools and recreation centers must complement legal regulations. Teaching children how to act responsibly is the best way to give them the strength of character to face these challenges and temptations.

15.4 Research and medicine

The Pirate Party supports research with currently illegal substances for therapeutic purposes. Further blocking of scientific work based solely on dogmatic arguments is no longer acceptable. Patients must not be hindered in their free choice of treatment. Well- trained, responsible physicians and informed patients must have the full responsibility for choosing the substances used for treatment. The dangers of all used substances must be fully disclosed. Free, self-determined use does not conflict with protection, prevention and education.

