4 Patents

As we transition from the industrial age to the information age, global patent laws are becoming obstacles to innovation rather than incentives. The attempt to design the future by conventional means not just fails to take into account the fundamental changes in the world, it also poses a great danger to tomorrow’s society due to patenting of innovations in the fields of genetic engineering, biotechnology and software patents. What we want is a more free market without the obstructions of contemporary patenting practice. We demand that the patent system be reformed or replaced by more adequate regulations. Under no circumstances must it be expanded by regulations that further inhibit innovation.

4.1 Opening of markets and dismantling of private monopolies

Increasing dismantling of monopolies and opening of markets are professed goals of our party. Patents, a form of government-backed private monopolies, lead to an artificial reduction of public welfare, which requires constant justification and supervision. Pa- tenting of industrial goods in the past is widely considered a success story, but this can neither be proved nor disproved. However, the social and economic circumstances ha- ve changed fundamentally in the post-industrial globalized society. Moreover, increased international competition leads to abuse of the patenting system, so that there is often no longer any discernible benefit for society. Therefore, we want to stop the increasing abuse of patents. Patenting of trivial inventions or abuse of patents to block progress must be prevented under all circumstances. This is especially true for the pharmaceutics industry. The large cash requirements and the monopolistic structures in this market require reorganization to put society’s resources to good use instead of wasting them because of blockades for the benefit of individuals. Patents on pharmaceutics also have very objectionable effects from an ethical point of view.

4.2 Patents in the information society

Economic success in the information society no longer just depends on technical inventions, but on knowledge, information and how they are developed. Attempts to regulate these factors by using the patent system are diametrically opposed to our demand for free knowledge and culture for humanity. We reject patents on organisms and genes, on business ideas and on software, because they have unreasonable and unjustifiable conse- quences, because they obstruct the advancement of the knowledge society, because they privatize public goods without compensation and without any emergency and because they do not constitute inventions in the original sense. The good development of small and medium IT companies throughout Massachusetts has shown that patents are completely unnecessary in the software sector.


